Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we will learn how to set up a per user post limit so that each user account can only
create so many posts, there are a lot of different reasons why you would want to set this up, maybe
to prevent malicious users from creating 30 million posts just to try to slow down or break your website
or even just to prevent innocent, non malicious users who are creating more posts than you would like.
OK, so in this window I'm logged in with my subscriber account and if I visit the my notes page at
the moment I have four existing note posts and let's imagine that we want to limit things so that each
user account can only have a maximum of five note posts.
You could use a different limit like 10 or 20 or 30.
OK, but the question is, how can we implement a per user post limit?
Well, the first step is to jump into our text editor and within our theme folder, I want you to jump
into functions dot, p, p and let's scroll down to the very bottom of this file, because remember
that we've already set up a filter that allows us to intercept requests right before data gets saved
into the WordPress database.
And we've already used our filter function to make sure that note posts must be private as well as sanitize
the title and content fields.
So now let's just use our filter function once again to make sure that a user account cannot create
more than five note posts.
Now, it's important to point out that this filter hook is going to run for every post time and we only
want to implement a per user limit for the note posted.
So we want to make sure that any code we're about to write lives within this basic if check.
So right within this first if statement, let's add a new line and I'm actually going to write a brand
new if statement.
So if parentheses curly brackets and for the condition check, let's say if the current user already
has more than four note posts, if that's true, then within the if statement we can just completely
exit and quit the current request so that no new post gets created.
Let me show you how I would set that up.
So within the condition, let's say, if and WordPress has a function named count user posts and it's
a function, so it gets its own set of parentheses and we want to give this function to things.
So A B, right.
Two arguments.
The first argument is which user account you're trying to count the posts of.
So instead of this placeholder, a, let's say, get current user ID, right, whichever user is sending
off this request, OK, and then the second argument is which post type you want to count.
So are we trying to count how many blog posts this user has created or how many professor posts they've
created?
No, we want to count how many note posts they've created.
So instead of the placeholder B, let's just say note.
OK, so this code that we've highlighted now will return a number of how many note posts they've already
created.
And then let's just say if that number is greater than four or whatever, you want to set the limit
to just choose one less than OK.
So if the user has already created more than four posts, then within the if statement, we just want
to completely exit out or cancel the current request.
And we can do that by simply calling a P function named DAI.
And within the parentheses we can actually include a message that will be passed along to the user.
So let's just say you have reached your no limit, OK, and die will prevent anything else from happening.
So none of this code below it will even run the filter function will not return any data and no new
posts or updates will be made.
OK, let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So at the moment, my subscriber account currently has created four note posts, so I should be able
to create at least one more.
Right.
Fifth post-test.
Lauren Ipsum click create.
OK, that was created successfully, but if I try to create another one, I should be over my limit.
So limit test lamaism create so nothing happens.
And if I check my console, there's the congrats message from the fifth post that we created a moment
ago.
But then when I tried to create the sixth post we see.
Sorry.
And if we expand.
This and read the response text, we see you have reached your note limit, perfect, so our new code
successfully prevented us from creating another post.
However, before we move on, let's test out our edit and delete buttons for existing posts now that
we've reached our limit.
So, for example, if I try to delete this fifth post test that I just created, I click delete, but
nothing happens.
And if I check the console, we see sorry.
And if I expand this message, the response text is you have reached your note limit.
Now clearly this is not what we want.
And this is a bit confusing, right?
Because I wasn't trying to create a new post.
I was just trying to delete one of my existing posts.
And I should always be able to delete a post no matter how many posts I currently have.
So let's jump back to our code and analyze what's going wrong.
So in WordPress, when you move a post into the trash, right.
Which is the first step towards deleting a post in order to move that post into the trash, WordPress
has to edit its post status and set it to trash.
Why am I telling you this?
Well, it's because this WP insert post data filter hook not only runs when you try to create a new
post, but it also runs any time you try to update a post.
So the problem and why we were unable to delete a post is because we are currently at our limit, right?
We've got five posts and when we sent that delete request, WordPress tried to edit the post and set
it status to trash.
But because this evaluated to true right, because we were over our limit, WordPress wasn't able to
set the stage to trash because instead our dysfunction ran and cancelled everything.
So all we need to do to fix things is make our if statement a bit less aggressive.
So instead of only checking to see if the post count is greater than four, let's also check to see
if the incoming request is to create a brand new post instead of just updating an existing post.
So after this, is the count greater than four, but still within the parentheses, let's say, and
to add on another condition check.
And unfortunately, there is no super easy, intuitive way of doing this.
We can't just say.
And if the request equals create.
Right, that doesn't exist in WordPress.
That was wishful thinking.
So instead, we need to get creative.
We need to ask ourselves how can we differentiate between an existing post and a brand new post that
has yet to actually be created?
And after scratching our heads and thinking about this for a moment, we would realize that an existing
post would have an I.D. number, whereas a brand new post that hasn't actually been created yet, it
would not have an ID.
Now, unfortunately, the data array that contains information about the requested post, right.
This array that gets passed into our function, it does not contain the ID of the post.
But luckily, this filter hook passes along a second array of data into our function.
So within our function definition, within the parentheses, right after data, let's say comma and
include a second parameter, let's name it post a R for post array.
And this contains slightly different information about the requested post.
Luckily for us, it does contain the ID number.
So within our IF statement right after that and for our second condition check, let's say post a R
look inside it with square brackets and capital ID.
Now as long as an ID number exists, this will evaluate to true.
But if we want to check for the opposite of that, we can just put an exclamation mark right before
it.
OK, now before we save this and test it out, we just need to do one more thing in order for our function
to actually access to parameters instead of just one, we need to make a change to this line of code
where we add the filter.
So right after the second argument where we specify our callback function, let's add a comma.
And first we need to provide a priority.
Let's just say 10, which is the default.
I will explain what this 10 means in just a moment.
The important part is we also want to include another argument and say to this two represents that we
want this function to be able to work with two parameters by default.
It's only set to one.
So this way we actually have access to the post array.
OK, now back to this 10, because we didn't really explain that this is the priority of the callback
function that you're setting.
Really, this is only ever an issue if you're setting multiple functions to run on the same filter hook.
So, for example, you don't need to do this, I'm only going to do this for demonstration reasons,
but if we duplicated this line and said that we wanted to add another filter to that same hook and then
change the name of the function that we want to call, well, then the priority number decides which
function would run first.
So the lower the number, the earlier it will run and the larger the number, the later it will run
again for our purposes.
This doesn't really matter.
It's just something I want you to be aware of.
So let me delete that.
Now, let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So back on the front end, I'm at my limit.
I've got five posts.
Let me try to delete this one again.
Cool, it was successful.
Now let me add another post, so I'm at my limit again and then let's try to make an edit to an existing
post limit test once again, Laura Ipsum created.
OK, let's try to make an edit to it.
So modified title click save.
Perfect, that was successful as well.
And if I try to create a sixth post, hopefully the server denies me so sixth post attempt testing,
click create.
Nothing happens if I check the console.
We see.
Sorry.
Cool.
So our limit policy is taking effect now.
Just a quick warning.
The remainder of this lesson has nothing to do with WordPress.
Now, I just want to focus on creating a nicer user experience with a bit of JavaScript.
And what I mean is if someone tries to create a post and it fails like this, they don't necessarily
know that they are over the limit.
So they might just click create.
And when it doesn't work, they would be confused and frustrated.
The average user doesn't know to check the console and check the error message and say, oh, you have
reached your note limit.
So why don't we use JavaScript so that if this message is received right, this exact you have reached
your note limit.
If that happens, then maybe we output a bit of text right here that reads, You have reached your limit,
delete a note to make room for a new one.
So right now, let's go edit the template that outputs this page in this form.
So back in our text editor, let's jump in to page my notes P and here's the create a new note form.
And down at the very bottom, below the last span.
Let's create a new line and let's create a brand new span and say no limit reached delete an existing
note to make room for a new one.
OK, and let's be sure to give the opening span tag a class of note limit message.
This will give it a bit of success that makes the text read, but also it will make it so.
This element is hidden when the page first loads and then we will need to use JavaScript to actually
reveal or display it.
OK, so let's save that.
And even if you refresh the my notes page, again, that text that we just added sits right here, but
it is hidden by default.
So now let's write a bit of JavaScript so that if we send out a request and the response text is you
have reached your limit, then we reveal that error message right here.
So in our text editor within our JavaScript modules folder, let's jump into my notes and let's scroll
down and find our create note method.
Here it is and within our Ajax request, let's look for our error property, which is a function that
will run only if the request is not successful and within this error, function may be right above this
console dot log.
Let's add a new line and set up an if statement.
So if parentheses curly brackets and let's say if response dot response text.
If you're wondering how I know to check for this exact name, you can just jump back into your browser
and send off a request that you know will fail because you're over the limit and then check your console
if you expand the official response and then scroll down our message of you reached your note limit
lives inside a property named response text.
OK, so back in our code, let's say if response dot response text equals and then instead of typing
it out, let's just copy and paste this exact value.
So copy that into my clipboard, paste it in.
OK, so if we receive this exact error message, then within the body of this if statement, let's use
J query to select that hidden bit of text that sits right here and we just want to reveal it.
So we use J Query to select an element that has a class of note limit message and let's give it a class.
So add class of active which will reveal it or display it.
OK, let's be sure to add a semicolon at the end of that line and let's save this and then back in the
browser.
Be sure to refresh or even perform a hard refresh.
OK, and let's try to send off a request that we know should fail because we're over our limit.
So create note.
Perfect.
We see that error message text right in the user interface.
So we're telling users they've reached their limit and they should delete an existing note to make room
for a new one.
So finally, why don't we set things up so that if they actually delete one of their notes and that
brings their note total to be less than five, then let's remove this error message on the fly.
Now, you and I know that any time you successfully make a request to the rest API, it responds back
with all sorts of data about that post.
So if a user deletes one of their notes to make room for a new note, it would be nice if the response
that the rest API sends back included a count of how many notes that user now has.
Well, by default, WordPress doesn't do that right.
It only sends back things like the title, the content, the permalink, the slug.
But luckily it's very easy for us to customize what the rest API responds with.
So let me show you what we're going to do in our text editor back and functions.
I'm going to scroll up to the very top, but for you, it might be somewhere else in your file.
But I want you to pause the video really quick and find your function that is named University Custom
Rest.
This is a function that we set up way back in the course when we wanted the rest API to give us the
author name for each post.
So you may not remember this, but we used something named Register Rest Field to add a new field or
property to the rest API response.
So right now, let's just duplicate these three lines.
The register rest field lines.
Copy that right below it, paste it to duplicate it and I'm going to modify this to fit my needs.
So this first property is the post typed.
You want to add something too.
So instead of post, it's the note posted, right.
Then we get to make up the name for the new property that gets returned.
So instead of author name, let's say user note count, OK, and then it's callback is a function that
returns whatever the value should be.
So instead of returning, get the author, let's delete that and return count user posts.
And remember, we give this two arguments.
The first is which user you want to count for.
So get current user I.D. and then the second argument is which post type you want to count.
So let's say note, OK, now if we save this, that new property named user note account will be available
to us.
So just as a quick test, if you try to edit one of your existing posts.
And then check the console well, within the WordPress response, there should now be a new property
named user note account with a relevant value.
OK, now let's go use this value within our delete note JavaScript method.
Remember that if a user deletes a note and then they are below their limit, we want to remove this
error message on the fly.
So back in our JavaScript are my notes file.
Let's look for our delete note method.
Here it is.
And within the success function, it doesn't really matter where, but maybe below this console log
line let's set up and if statements of if parentheses curly brackets and let's say if response dot user
note count is less than five, well then what do we want to do?
We want to target the element with a class of note limit message and we want to get rid of the class
that makes it visible.
So remove class active K, let's go ahead and save this and then perform a hard refresh on the front
end.
OK, so I'm at my limit so if I try to create a new post.
The error message appears, right, but then if I delete one of my existing posts to make room call,
that error message disappears on the fly and now I successfully can create that new note.
And that's going to bring this lesson to a close.
In our next lesson, we are really going to change gears and work on a new feature where subscriber
accounts can like or heart or favorite a professor.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you then.